The circuits and firmware archived here are derived from two sets of CT24/25 PCBs. One set came from
a CT25A that was used as a sales demonstration set in the Kent area, possibly Maidstone. This
phone dates to January 1987. Most parts are dated 1986 but the Line Interface PCB, the smaller
of the two main PCBs, is older, dating to 1984 and thus may have replaced the original.

The second phone was a public phone from Jersey. Strictly speacking it is not a CT24 as it was
not a BT phone. Comparisions with others show that in fact, other than a mildly different 
Sensor 5 assembly, it is identical to a BT CT24 in all but name and the logo on the keypad 
finger plate. It is also complete with cash box assembly and on a backboard that photo reference
shows was used on a V-shaped open booth on Jersey in the 1990s. This phone appears to date to 1989.

It may well have been taken out of service due to a vandalised display. The glass can be replaced,
most easily with a polycarbonate window which, documents from 1986 show, was an official BT spare
part. However, the LCD display was damaged beyond use. I am still looking for a replacement.

This phone came with its battery, which creates significant problems due to leakage. The leaked
liquid drops down onto the lower edge of the processor, especially on to the connector and cable to 
the Line Interface PCB below. I have had to replace the flat multiway cable between the two PCBs and
bypass one of the pins on the PCB connector. Despite that the Processor and Line Interface PCBs appear
to work. Though there is still an issue with instability on the Line Interface.

This phone was not fully operational when I received it, and may well never have been. It 
clearly had been wired to a phone line but may never have been used outside of the "999 Calls Only"
state. While it was a seemingly complete set, on a proper backboard and with a cash box, even with
a cash container inside, there was no cable connecting the processor to the cash box and "Sensor 5"
which should have been in the chute connecting the phone to the cash box assembly below. I made 
a new cable to replace the missing one.

Beside the missing cable, another, connecting the coin validator to the processor pcb was damaged.
At first I thought it may have been damaged by getting caught in the door closing and locking mechanism.
However, after repairing the cable I found the phone drained the internal battery very quickly. Suspiciously, 
The damaged wires were the power and ground to the validator. Maybe the damage was deliberate. The
root cause of the problem turned out to be a damaged connector on the the processor PCB through which the
coin handling solenoids were connected. The damaged allowed the cable connector to be put in the wrong way
which resulted in in low resistance paths that drained the battery. Sorting out the cabling allowed the
coin validator and runways to work mostly correctly.

There was no battery in this phone when I received it, and no sign of any corrosion on the battery holder or
anywhere else. It is highly likely that no battery was fitted when this phone was in use as a demonstrator.
I fitted a NiMH 6V battery intended for use in alarm systems which was the same diameter as the original NiCd Battery
Secondary 35 and clips into the existing battery holder. It even had tails with a compatible connector that 
plugs straight into the board. This has so far been a totaly successful replacement, providing over two weeks of
battery RAM retention. 

I managed to get hold of a BT Tester 297C, seemingly little used and still in its original box. I hoped to use this
to sete up the RAM tarriff and reporting configuration - a vital step in getting the phone out of "999 Calls Only" 
mode and operation. However, while the tester appeared to work, the phone refused to recognise the config 
downloade to it. This was the point at which I decided I needed to get to the bottom of this by reverse engineering
the circuits of the phone and tester to find out how this this ticked and what, if any, secrets it they held.

The main thrust of my reverse engineering was to find what components did what. I also hoped to be able to disassemble
and, if possible, simulate the firmware on a PC. One thing I wanted to know was why was my tester not loading the
configuration? Were there, for example, firmware compatibility issues between my tester 297C and my phone's firmware.

That leads on to the question of what, exactly, is the phone's firmware. Well, I have to mid-production phones. It is
clear the firmware in both Ct24s and 25s was the same -the EPROMs are labelled as such. Essentially Any difference in 
functionality between Call Office (i.e. CT24/kiosk) use and renter's (i.e. CT25) is a result of configuration via the
Tester 297. While the PCBs have differences in components - the CT24 PCBs had more ceramic cased ICs and were more 
likely to be conformally coated- they and the firmware are interchangable between CT24s and 25s in service at the same
time.

The CT24/25 are "powered" as we say today, by the RCA COSMAC CDP1802 processor. This is a quirky, slow (even for the time) 
but versatile mid-70s microprocessor well suited to low power embedded applications such as payphone control. It has a 
64kbyte address range similar to other 8-bit processors of the era. In the CT24/25 the lower 28K of address space is
wired for EPROMS - just 14K on early processor PCBS using 2K byte 27C16 EPROMS but linkable for 4K byte 27C32 EPROMS.
All the, admittedly few, PCBs I have seen are set for 27C32 EPROMs. The next 4K is unusable. From 32k upwards is 1K byte 
of battery backed static RAM mirrored all the way to the end of memory.

This is where Hywel Clatworthy came in. He also has two CT24/35 processor PCBs. He also has a Tester 297E which he has used
reportedly suceesfully to configure one of his phones. WOrking together, he has provided me with dumps of his firmware and
that of his tester 297C. 

The tester 297 was first developed to support the production CT22Bs - the original Blue Payphone. The CT22A had used the 
Intel 4040, whereas the production phones, the substantially more numerous CT22Bs, used the CDP1802. The orginal tester 297,
later known as the 297A, had its own 1802 and corresponding firmware and was developed by AGI, who were one half of the AGITELCO
joint venture with the Swiss developers of the phone, AUTELCA. It appears that the GPO was keen to use the same tester to configure
the CT22s successor, the Ct24/25 Blue Payphone 2.

The earliest issue/version (issue appears to have been used at first, changing to version later) of firmware I have so far had
access to or awareness of is Issue 4. This is shorter than all later firmware issues that I currently know of, fitting into 
three 27C32s, i.e. 12K bytes. My CT25 has V11.0 firmware: six 27C32 EPROMs, i.e. twice the size of Issue 4: 24K bytes. My
Jersey "CT24" has V12.1, again six 27C32 EPROMs. Hywel has a processor loaded with V15 firmware, also six 27C32s.

For reasons as yet unknown, the tester was updated twice: to 297C, the model I have, and later to 297E which is the version Hywell 
has. I have determined that the hardware differences between the C and E are very minor. The only differences being the front panel
label and most significantly the firmware. My 297C is loaded with Issue 3 firmware and Hywel's 297E has Issue 8... or is it? The 
EPROM is th only one of all the firmware EPROMs available to us so far to have human readable identifiying/versioning strings and
they state its Issue *7* despite being labelled Issue 8. We do not know the reason for this discrepancy.

It has become clear that there were several changes in specifcation and functionality during the lifetime of these phones. One
thing to have changed was the coins, several of which were replaced by smaller versions during the service lifetime of the CT24/25.
We beleive there are at least two versions of the coin validator, each compatible with different versions of phone firmware. I
now know that 297E tester firmware is not backwards compatible with that in the 297C which in turn may well have not been compatible
with the 297/297A. The configuration data in the 297E is at least twice as long as that in the 297C, and even the way it sends
reporting numbers appears incompatible. So, to get a CT24/25 working you have to have the right, compatible, version of the Tester 297.
As yet it is unclear which Tester works with which firmware. So far Ive not seen anywhere near enough firmware version to be able to
determine compatibilty and have not seen any documents that address this issue. If you have a CT24/25 with anything other than 
Issue/Versions 4, 11, 12 or 15 I'd love to get my hands on your EPROMS, so to speak.

Another thing to be aware of is that the CT24/25 was followed by several updated phone models which look very similar to the CT24/25, 
so much so that it is can be difficult to tell them apart. These all used the same CDP1802 processer but had larger EPROMS. These include 
the CT34 - which appears to have been effectively a CT24/25 Mk2 with a single large PCB with 27C64 EPROMs and integrated the functions
of the three PCBs of the CT24/25. Then there was the CT44 and CT54, by which time the display had become a much more versatile backlit
dot matrix type and the much squarer/angular black handset had been introduced. I have yet to track all the differences of phone models.

The biggest hurdle, though by no means the only one, to getting these iconic payphones to work, is that the Tester 297s are now very rare.
Our intent is to emulate the various Tester 297 variants with a PC or smartphone app making getting your CT24/25, and possibly its later
siblings, the CT34, 44 and 54, that bit easier to get working.

Chris Boyce, 19th May 2025.
